---
title: "Fundraising in school - it's not all about shaking the charity can"
date: 2017-06-17T15:04:10.000Z
description: Already thinking ahead to Red Nose Day 2018, Jo Robertson explains how Comic Relief had a powerful effect on her students' behaviour and learning
image: /img/Red-Nose-Day.jpg
---

Our school is a large mixed comprehensive in Lincolnshire that prides itself not only on academic success, but also on creating a school ethos with relationships and community at its heart. As part of this, we actively encourage all students to get involved in fundraising activities for both local and international charities. Although our starting point was altruistic, we've found that at the same time as raising money for others we're reaping rich rewards as a school.

Our involvement with Comic Relief is a case in point. Three years ago we teamed up with Peterborough United for a Sport Relief event that proved a massive success. Seeing the enthusiasm and energy generated by this, we decided to make the Comic Relief causes a central part of our school year.

Since then students have increasingly stepped up to take the lead in organising events and coming up with fundraising ideas. For this year's Sport Relief, a working group of five boys led the way in enthusing and encouraging students and staff, creating a buzz and excitement that lasted throughout a whole week of activities. As a teacher, it's a joy to see students happily stepping out of their comfort zone for a good cause – memorable moments included watching some of the now coolest students in school donning tutus for a unique version of the Sport Relief dance.

Advertisement

Positive role models have been one of the main, and unexpected, benefits to emerge from our fundraising efforts. The working group students were transformed from geeks to heroes. They became hard working, conscientious learners that others now aspire to become. New groups of students have come forward to take the lead next year, building a legacy for the future.

Similarly, watching people coming out of their comfort zone (and making idiots of themselves by any ordinary standards) has set a great example for some of our less confident students, who have learnt to worry less about how others perceive them. Fundraising has proved a liberating context for individuals to develop in new and exciting ways.

Each year, we see a growing number of students with the confidence to come forward with their own fundraising ideas. Seeing these ideas through to fruition involves determination, planning, negotiation, hard work and risk taking. However, the elation students experience when they succeed and the pride they feel when they realise the impact they've made are palpable.

Staff have seen this increased confidence and can-do attitude carried through into students' attitude to learning. Although evidence is only anecdotal at this stage, teachers, pastoral leaders and senior managers all reported improvements in students' behaviour and engagement during last year's Sport Relief week. The genuine buzz created by fundraising events improved the atmosphere in school without at any point detracting from learning. We are planning to analyse behaviour data in the future to confirm this feedback.

But is this effect just temporary, or can it have longer term benefits? I think it can. For me, the engagement and enjoyment created during Comic Relief weeks is some of the greatest I have ever experienced as a teacher – not just since joining Deepings, but at any school. As a result, relationships with students are strengthened and improved. We are reminded how much they are capable of, and they see us in a different light as we share in some of the sillier moments. In my view, the long-term effects can be renewed energy, enthusiasm and enjoyment, on the part of both teacher and student.

In terms of classroom learning, we have found that organisations like Comic Relief make it easy for fundraising to be about raising awareness and understanding, as well as money. Building geography and PSHE schemes of work around the key Comic Relief goal, a just world free from poverty, has strengthened our curriculum. Students have gained a better understanding of, national and global organisations and have benefited immensely from the expertise and experience they offer. We have found that parents are particularly positive about this partnership working, actively encouraging their children to get involved and, in turn, supporting fundraising initiatives themselves.

So what's the upshot of all this? I guess it's that with some effort, fundraising can mean so much more to schools than just raising money for a good cause. We are extremely proud, as a school, that over the past three years we have raised in excess of £25,000 for Comic Relief. Less tangible perhaps, but just as real, is what we have gained as a school. How do you put a price on independence, excitement, engagement and enjoyment?

Jo Robertson is the head of the performance faculty at The Deepings School.
